src/blog/2019/12/ephemerality-bus-ticket-theory-of-genius.jinja.md, before:

{% extends "layouts/post.html" %}
{% set title = "Ephemerality and the Bus Ticket Theory of Genius" %}
{% set date = "2019-12-02, 21:01:56" %}
{% set social_image = "ephemerality.jpg" %}

{% set description | markdown %}
In Paul Graham’s recent essay, _[The Bus Ticket Theory of
Genius](http://paulgraham.com/genius.html)_, he posits that
disinterested obsession, akin to that possessed by a bus ticket
collector, is a key component for doing great work. In this post I try
to relate this back to my [previous
discussion](https://jpeoples.github.io/blog/2019/11/service-anxiety-information-overload/)
of ephemerality and serendipity when looking at "service anxiety."
{% endset %}

{% set body_html | markdown %}

In Paul Graham’s recent essay, _[The Bus Ticket Theory of
Genius](http://paulgraham.com/genius.html)_, he posits that
disinterested obsession, akin to that possessed by a bus ticket
collector, is a key component for doing great work. He writes


> When you look at the lives of people who've done great work, you
> see a consistent pattern. They often begin with a bus ticket
> collector's obsessive interest in something that would have seemed
> pointless to most of their contemporaries. One of the most
> striking features of Darwin's book about his voyage on the Beagle
> is the sheer depth of his interest in natural history. His
> curiosity seems infinite. Ditto for Ramanujan, sitting by the hour
> working out on his slate what happens to series.
>
> It's a mistake to think they were "laying the groundwork" for the
> discoveries they made later. There's too much intention in that
> metaphor. Like bus ticket collectors, they were doing it because
> they liked it.

I think what rings true to me about this is the rejection of the role of
top-down intentionality; the greatness of the resulting body of work is
an emergent property of disinterested pursuit of what was interesting.
In my experience in pursuing any kind of intellectual work, a top-down
imposition of structure always seems to be relatively useless except
insofar as it gets you doing _something_. The real structure of anything
I’ve ever worked on has ultimately been revealed: it emerges from the
process discovery, refinement, iteration. Certainly, I imagine this
would be uncontroversial in the programming community. It is essentially
waterfall (top-down) vs agile (bottom-up, emergent).

Graham goes on to say


> An obsessive interest will even bring you luck, to the extent anything
> can. Chance, as Pasteur said, favors the prepared mind, and if there's
> one thing an obsessed mind is, it's prepared.

And so again—serendipitously—serendipity enters the equation.

---

In a [previous
post](https://jpeoples.github.io/blog/2019/11/service-anxiety-information-overload/)
I examined “service anxiety”—the fear of the loss of access to data
controlled by web services—and argued by analogy with information
overload, that to alleviate this anxiety one should relinquish control
and embrace serendipity. I argued that the connection between service
anxiety and information overload was ephemerality, either in the access
to the services we rely on, or in the information we are bombarded with.
This creates an unstable foundation—a drifting reality—on which we
attempt to build the structure of our lives.

But the ephemerality runs even deeper and more literally than this:


> [W]hen we reach the end of our days, our life experience will equal
> that which we have paid attention to, whether by choice or default. 
>
> * Tim Wu, paraphrasing William James, in _[The Attention
>   Merchants](https://www.amazon.com/Attention-Merchants-Scramble-Inside-Heads/dp/0385352018)_
>   (p. 7)

Even if you maintain a high-latency information diet—unplugging,
meditating, reading old books in a cabin in the woods all day—central to
your experience will still be a stream of consciousness that is
constantly shifting. The experience of reading a book is in itself
highly dynamic: a steady stream of words rattle through your
consciousness by which you attempt to glimpse some series of structures
of information from the author’s mind. All experience is constructed
from a stream of ephemeral sensory input.

Do you remember everything you’ve ever read? Almost certainly not. The
things that stick are those that can be fitted into the elaborate
internal scaffolding of your own mind, which is itself built up through
a series of structure preserving transformations mining this ephemeral
stream of consciousness for the raw building materials.

If we consider the ephemeral nature of how we experience life itself,
the strategy to handle service anxiety and information overload can be
applied much more broadly. The key to creating coherence in the
ephemeral stream that is life is to opportunistically build up this
internal scaffolding, embracing the role of serendipity, and allowing an
appropriate and manageable structure to emerge. 

In the realm of our daily routines and behaviours this would seem to
evoke Sarah Perry’s [Deep
Laziness](https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2018/04/06/deep-laziness/).[^1]

In the realm of intellectual progress I think it evokes, at least in
part, Paul Graham’s Bus Ticket Theory of Genius discussed above. The
state of disinterested obsession is a mindset that facilitates the
relinquishing of control and top-down intentionality, allowing one to
embrace the following of curiosity, the serendipitous realizations of
new connections, and the gradual emergence of a body of work.


[^1]:
     Credit to this post for putting the idea of structure preserving
     transformations into my internal scaffolding, letting me make the
     connections I’m trying to convey here :)

{% endset %}

Commit message:

Add new post, update links in older posts

src/blog/2019/12/ephemerality-bus-ticket-theory-of-genius.jinja.md, after:

{% extends "layouts/post.html" %}
{% set title = "Ephemerality and the Bus Ticket Theory of Genius" %}
{% set date = "2019-12-02, 21:01:56" %}
{% set social_image = "ephemerality.jpg" %}

{% set description | markdown %}
In Paul Graham’s recent essay, _[The Bus Ticket Theory of
Genius](http://paulgraham.com/genius.html)_, he posits that
disinterested obsession, akin to that possessed by a bus ticket
collector, is a key component for doing great work. In this post I try
to relate this back to my [previous
discussion](https://jpeoples.github.io/blog/2019/11/service-anxiety-information-overload/)
of ephemerality and serendipity when looking at "service anxiety."
{% endset %}

{% set body_html | markdown %}

In Paul Graham’s recent essay, _[The Bus Ticket Theory of
Genius](http://paulgraham.com/genius.html)_, he posits that
disinterested obsession, akin to that possessed by a bus ticket
collector, is a key component for doing great work. He writes


> When you look at the lives of people who've done great work, you
> see a consistent pattern. They often begin with a bus ticket
> collector's obsessive interest in something that would have seemed
> pointless to most of their contemporaries. One of the most
> striking features of Darwin's book about his voyage on the Beagle
> is the sheer depth of his interest in natural history. His
> curiosity seems infinite. Ditto for Ramanujan, sitting by the hour
> working out on his slate what happens to series.
>
> It's a mistake to think they were "laying the groundwork" for the
> discoveries they made later. There's too much intention in that
> metaphor. Like bus ticket collectors, they were doing it because
> they liked it.

I think what rings true to me about this is the rejection of the role of
top-down intentionality; the greatness of the resulting body of work is
an emergent property of disinterested pursuit of what was interesting.
In my experience in pursuing any kind of intellectual work, a top-down
imposition of structure always seems to be relatively useless except
insofar as it gets you doing _something_. The real structure of anything
I’ve ever worked on has ultimately been revealed: it emerges from the
process discovery, refinement, iteration. Certainly, I imagine this
would be uncontroversial in the programming community. It is essentially
waterfall (top-down) vs agile (bottom-up, emergent).

Graham goes on to say


> An obsessive interest will even bring you luck, to the extent anything
> can. Chance, as Pasteur said, favors the prepared mind, and if there's
> one thing an obsessed mind is, it's prepared.

And so again—serendipitously—serendipity enters the equation.

---

In a [previous
post](https://jpeoples.github.io/blog/2019/11/service-anxiety-information-overload/)
I examined “service anxiety”—the fear of the loss of access to data
controlled by web services—and argued by analogy with information
overload, that to alleviate this anxiety one should relinquish control
and embrace serendipity. I argued that the connection between service
anxiety and information overload was ephemerality, either in the access
to the services we rely on, or in the information we are bombarded with.
This creates an unstable foundation—a drifting reality—on which we
attempt to build the structure of our lives.

But the ephemerality runs even deeper and more literally than this:


> [W]hen we reach the end of our days, our life experience will equal
> that which we have paid attention to, whether by choice or default. 
>
> * Tim Wu, paraphrasing William James, in _[The Attention
>   Merchants](https://www.amazon.com/Attention-Merchants-Scramble-Inside-Heads/dp/0385352018)_
>   (p. 7)

Even if you maintain a high-latency information diet—unplugging,
meditating, reading old books in a cabin in the woods all day—central to
your experience will still be a stream of consciousness that is
constantly shifting. The experience of reading a book is in itself
highly dynamic: a steady stream of words rattle through your
consciousness by which you attempt to glimpse some series of structures
of information from the author’s mind. All experience is constructed
from a stream of ephemeral sensory input.

Do you remember everything you’ve ever read? Almost certainly not. The
things that stick are those that can be fitted into the elaborate
internal scaffolding of your own mind, which is itself built up through
a series of structure preserving transformations mining this ephemeral
stream of consciousness for the raw building materials.

If we consider the ephemeral nature of how we experience life itself,
the strategy to handle service anxiety and information overload can be
applied much more broadly. The key to creating coherence in the
ephemeral stream that is life is to opportunistically build up this
internal scaffolding, embracing the role of serendipity, and allowing an
appropriate and manageable structure to emerge. 

In the realm of our daily routines and behaviours this would seem to
evoke Sarah Perry’s [Deep
Laziness](https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2018/04/06/deep-laziness/).[^1]

In the realm of intellectual progress I think it evokes, at least in
part, Paul Graham’s Bus Ticket Theory of Genius discussed above. The
state of disinterested obsession is a mindset that facilitates the
relinquishing of control and top-down intentionality, allowing one to
embrace the following of curiosity, the serendipitous realizations of
new connections, and the gradual emergence of a body of work.

*Update: I've begun a blogchain in which I further examine some of
these themes: [Boredom World]({{ "/blog/boredom-world/" | ensure_fullhref }}).*

[^1]:
     Credit to this post for putting the idea of structure preserving
     transformations into my internal scaffolding, letting me make the
     connections I’m trying to convey here :)

{% endset %}
